---
title: Goals Update
published: true
---

It's the end of the year and I'd like to take some time to post again on my progress this year, along with goals for the next 6 months. Going back to my previous post https://nyxtom.github.io/2019/08/15/aiming-purposefully/ I set the following goals:

* Write articles about algorithms and explanations of core computer science and game research concepts
* Spend time improving my skills and applicable knowledge in mathematics as it applies to game design and research
* Continue practicing my piano skills to play at another gig
* Explore social meetups in the space of game research and design
* Build a usable prototype/portfolio gallery based on experiments written in articles
* Run in an actual 10k or some sort of race outside of my usual runs
* Be closer to paying off debts
* Plan a trip or visit the Pacific Northwest to explore the area
* Get better at organizing regular simplified lunch routines

Of these goals, I will do a quick review of these goals and others that I incorporated into my routines as improvements.

* Write articles about algorithms and explanations of core computer science and game research concepts:

This one I was not doing, though I did spend time writing about a few times in August, September, October. Most of my time was spent listening to mythology concepts and underlying narrative structure. I have spent significant time understanding how the mind works. I was able to eliminate more distractions and get to a pace at work. I would like to keep trying to write more. I spent time every day targeting what needed to get done, reviewing it as such, and doing what I could to improve some mental clarity around this. At the very least, I got a little better at the discipline of writing itself. I would like to target this where I could in these areas.

* Spend time improving my skills and applicable knowledge in mathematics as it applies to game design and research:

This one is sort of a bust, I did spend time improving skills but less so in these specific areas. I spent regular time improving specific work related skill sets and technical stacks - slowly making my way towards technical expertise in areas that might be applicable to game work. Will work to improve this.

* Continue practicing piano skills to play at another gig

Did this one! Played at a Christmas performance

* Explore social meetups in the space of game research and design

Accomplished in part, I found a few meetups that I do like attending. Will continue this effort.

* Build a usable prototype/portfolio gallery based on experiments written in articles

Not much of a portfolio here, will come back to this one.

* Run in an actual 10k or some sort of race outside of my usual runs

I have improved my running routine and maintained it, so it hasn't gotten worse!

* Be closer to paying off debts

This one is definitely on track. Should be close to paid off mid next year.

* Get better at organizing regular simplified lunch routines

Managed to incorporate some good lunch routines and daily meals. Definitely needs improvement, but it hasn't gotten worse!


For the next 6 months and year I would like to try and aim towards the following sections:

Health:

- Get better at cooking meals from basic ingredients. This year I cut back eating out for financial reasons. I now incorporate intermittent fasting, smoothies, lots of veggies, some meat. Cold potatoes are a staple for satiety. I would like to continue exploring different vegetables variety with a single new recipe based on a given veggie/root at least each week.
- Do a sunrise hike at a state park
- Incorporate yoga as pre routine to workout regiment in the early morning. Incorporate body weight workout into running routine.

Joy/Relationships:

- Play and finish existing games I own: Witcher 3, BoTW.
- Plan for and invest in relationships - set aside time
- Take dog out to walks at parks more
- Introduce and invest in game night with family
- Invite family over and cook for them

Home/Finances:

- Work towards purchasing a home this year
- Make one room in the home as beautiful as possible.

Work/Skills:

- Build a game with webgl, wasm, rust, work through building a city builder game
- Finish rust book, rustwasm
- Attend Meetups, make a presentation at one
- Stay consistent with focused time. I got really good at eliminating all distractions this year, would like that to continue into next year.
- Stay consistent with one pull request a day.
- Play piano at public gig, be able to play through first movement at least in Mozart’s sonata

Nature:

- I've been recently trying to incorporate this as a regular routine. I really do enjoy being outside and I would like to take some time to understand a bit about the "bushcraft" type trips. Simple wilderness survival skills that I can practice at state parks might be fun to try out.


Much of my time is consumed by being a parent (which isn't exactly a bad thing, since it meets one of my primary goals), outside of that I have attempted to incorporate skill building and rounding out the dimensions while spending time with the kiddo - this means doing activities like playing piano with her, going for hikes, teaching her how to code, playing with puzzles, story playing mythology, cooking and learning about meals.
